April 2021
The world computer 
Introduction to Ethereum (ETH)
For Professional clients only
WisdomTree.eu +44 (0) 207 448 4330
WisdomTree INTRODUCTION TO ETHEREUM 2
Ether is the second largest cryptocurrency by market capitalization behind bitcoin. Its current market cap stands 
at 290.69 billion USD, representing approximately 14% of the total cryptocurrency market1
. 
Imagined in 2013, and created in 2015, the blockchain network Ethereum has grown in innovation and utility. 
Different from Bitcoin’s primary function as a peer-to-peer electronic cash system, Ethereum invents a new world 
of peer-to-peer applications.
Before we dive into details, it’s important to distinguish ether (ETH) from Ethereum. Ether refers to the 
cryptocurrency used on the Ethereum blockchain. Ethereum refers to the blockchain network. 
What’s Ethereum? 
Ethereum is a blockchain platform that handles programs and applications without relying on a centralized party. 
It is “the world’s programmable blockchain2
”. 
The platform is built on the public, open-source, decentralized, and cryptographic blockchain technology. It 
powers decentralized applications (dApps) that are supported by a transaction protocol called smart contract. 
With its collective computing power on the distributed network (the Ethereum Virtual Machine), it executes 
peer-to-peer transactions to realize automatic, conditional transfer of value and information, including money, 
voting rights, and property. 
Ethereum can be compared to a “world computer” on a blockchain, where the underlying blockchain technology 
is the virtual machine’s hard drive, smart contracts are programs, miners are CPUs, and users pay with ETH to 
use this “computer”.
1 On April 15th, 2021
2 https://ethereum.org/en/what-is-ethereum
Clients Users
Smart Contracts Programs
Miners CPUs
Blockchain Hard Drive
ETHEREUM COMPUTER
For Professional clients only
WisdomTree.eu +44 (0) 207 448 4330
WisdomTree INTRODUCTION TO ETHEREUM 3
Solving the Problem
Ethereum’s invention is inspired by Bitcoin. 
Bitcoin established the foundation for decentralized blockchain technology. But its functionality is limited to 
peer-to-peer electronic cash transfer. Ethereum expands upon Bitcoin’s functionality to programmable apps. 
Essentially, it aims to create a decentralized computer network to run various applications. To borrow its founder 
Vitalik Buterin’s metaphor: Bitcoin is like a calculator, but Ethereum wants to become a smart phone running 
many applications3
.
This decentralized network would automate decisions and transactions, thus reducing the need for a trusted 
central party. It can lower the need for intermediaries, reduce arbitrations costs, prevent fraud, and minimize 
accidental incidents.
How Does Ethereum Work? 
SMART CONTRACTS 
At the core of Ethereum are smart contracts. 
Smart contracts are one of the two types of Ethereum accounts in which a set of instructions is programmed 
to tell the system what to do. Nick Szabo, developer of the concept, often compared it to the codes behind 
vending machines.
A smart contract is executed when triggered by a transaction. In the example of a vending machine, the 
transaction is when users insert a coin. Once the smart contract is triggered, actions are executed based on the 
“if…then…” conditions embedded in the smart contract code. 
For example, by pressing a combination of buttons on a vending machine, a bottle of water would get dropped. 
The specific good that gets dropped in the vending machine is the outcome of the smart contract. On the 
Ethereum network, that could be either a value transfer of ETH to another account, or a transaction to trigger 
another smart contract. 
3 Vitalik mentioned this metaphor during a speech he gave on October 10th, 2016, called “Ethereum in
25 Minutes.”
For Professional clients only
WisdomTree.eu +44 (0) 207 448 4330
WisdomTree INTRODUCTION TO ETHEREUM 4
A smart contract abides by a pre-defined set of rules, that allows it to automatically execute code the same way 
on any Ethereum node on the network. This eliminates the need for a third party to carry out code execution 
on behalf of users, making the system decentralized. It empowers coders to create a wide range of applications 
layering together different smart contracts. 
To provide a concrete example, consider Etherisc, a decentralized insurance application on the Ethereum 
network. Members can purchase insurance directly on the application with its native token. Then, a pool of 
money is established, aggregating insurance payments from all members. When a disaster hits, payouts will 
be made to impacted members without the need to go through traditional insurance industry’s cumbersome 
reimbursement process. Crop insurance for example, could automatically pay out money if drought or flood 
events are reported in the area by government agencies. 
GAS
Fees need to be paid in ETH to miners in order to facilitate transactions and execute smart contracts. The fee 
that’s charged is called gas. Gas price is often a small fraction of ETH, which is denoted in the unit of Gwei 
(109
 Gwei = 1 ETH). 
Gas is essential in sustaining the Ethereum network. It motivates miners to process and verify transactions for 
a monetary reward. The amount of gas needed in a transaction is roughly equivalent to the value of energy 
needed plus a small transaction fee. Gas price fluctuates with supply and demand for processing power since 
miners can choose to not process transactions when gas prices are low.
Gas has another important function in preventing unintentional waste of energy. Because the coding language 
for Ethereum is Turing-complete, there is a possibility of a program running indefinitely, and a transaction can be 
left consuming a lot of energy. A gas limit is imposed as the maximum price users are willing to pay to facilitate 
transactions. When gas runs out, the program will be terminated, and no additional energy would be used. 
APPLICATIONS
Ethereum’s applications take advantage of blockchain technology’s decentralized and immutable nature. They 
can be created and contributed to by anyone, without tempering the system’s security. Their functions range 
widely. Here are a few important examples:
+ Decentralized Finance (DeFi): DeFi aims to build an open and global financial system that can be 
accessed by anyone with access to the Internet. Unlike the trust-based finance industry or FinTech, 
DeFi is trust-minimized, meaning that the system’s operation does not rely on any single individual 
entity but owned by their users. This structure enables it to be accessible on-demand, transparent, 
and potentially faster and cheaper. It connects peer-to-peer supply and demand, eliminating the 
need for intermediaries. 
DeFi’s functionalities have grown to become a financial ecosystem since its launch. Now, users can 
borrow, lend, invest, trade, earn interest, buy insurance, and transfer money like they would in the 
traditional financial system. 
+ Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO): A DAO refers to an organization without a third party 
that is established for a common purpose. This organization operates and collaborates through a 
shared, defined, and automated protocol to ensure all group members’ voices are heard and the 
decision-making process is transparent. Each DAO has an embedded treasury in which the funds are 
stored, and the funds are spent according to decisions made by members’ voting. 
For Professional clients only
WisdomTree.eu +44 (0) 207 448 4330
WisdomTree INTRODUCTION TO ETHEREUM 5
 One of the examples of DAO is a decentralized venture capital fund named “The DAO” launched 
in 2016. Members could purchase DAO tokens to gain rights to vote on investment proposals. If 
the voted project became profitable, members would be given a return according to their stakes. 
Although the DAO was an innovative idea, it failed due to a bug that existed in its smart contract code. 
Hackers stole a portion of the organization’s funds. This event resulted in a decision to implement a 
hard fork on the Ethereum network, creating a branch called Ethereum Classic. Other examples of a 
DAO have continued to successfully operate. MakerDAO enables the continued generation of Dai, a 
decentralized stablecoin.
+ Non-fungible Tokens (NFT): NFTs are records of data on the blockchain, which makes the underlying 
assets immutable and differentiated. They range from digital assets such as photos, audios, videos, 
shares, and certificates to physical assets such as properties and paintings. 
Since digital files are easy to replicate, having non-fungible tokens that prove ownership of the digital 
files is important. When a NFT gets bought, the owner gains an unchangeable ownership record. 
The appeal of NFTs for digital assets lies in the sense of rarity it creates and thereby improves the 
asset’s collectable value. For artists selling the assets, NFTs allow more direct distribution of their work 
without a third-party platform, which could better protect their copyrights and increase their profits. 
 For NFTs backed by real physical assets, tokenization proves digital ownership of the item as well as 
preserves the uniqueness of the item. Although physical assets’ NFT market is not as developed as 
the market for digital assets, there are a lot of possibilities in putting tokenized assets into use. These 
could be facilitating selling and buying among NFTs and using them as collateral to borrow funds.
 Nyan Cat GIF created by Chris Torres was sold for 300ETH (~$600,000) on Feb. 19th, 2021.
Where is Ethereum going?
The idea of Ethereum was proposed in 2013. On July 30th, 2015, the first version of Ethereum was released, 
called “Frontier.” There are four main stages of Ethereum’s development, which are: 
+ Frontier (July 2015 – March 2016)
+ Homestead (March 2016 – October 2017)
+ Metropolis (October 2017 – December 2019)
+ Serenity (December 2019 – 2022)
For Professional clients only
WisdomTree.eu +44 (0) 207 448 4330
WisdomTree INTRODUCTION TO ETHEREUM 6
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Aug-15
Nov-15
Feb-16
May-16
Aug-16
Nov-16
Feb-17
May-17
Aug-17
Nov-17
Feb-18
May-18
Aug-18
Nov-18
Feb-19
May-19
Aug-19
Nov-19
Feb-20
May-20
Aug-20
Nov-20
Feb-21
Ether Price ($)
Frontier Homestead Metropolis Serenity Closing Price (USD)
Ether Price and Development Stages
Data from 09/08/2015 to 15/04/2021. Historical performance is not an indication of future performance and 
any investments may go down in value.
Currently, we are at the still developing Serenity stage, which is also known as Ethereum 2.0. This version aims 
to solve two main challenges Ethereum is facing: a clogged network that can only handle limited number of 
transactions per second, and the large consumption of energy that comes with the proof-of-work mechanism4
. 
Two of the major upgrades include the shift from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake and the implementation of 
shard chains which would spread the workload of the network5
. Ethereum 2.0 is envisioned to be more scalable, 
secure, and sustainable. 
Comparison vs. Bitcoin
Since Ethereum is inspired by Bitcoin’s blockchain framework, the two shares the underlying blockchain 
technology and thus are decentralized, public and immutable. 
But there are some main differences between Ethereum and Bitcoin. 
4 Proof-of-work is a consensus mechanism that is used to verify blockchain transactions’ validity, through 
solving of computationally intensive puzzles using miners’ computers’ processing power. 
5 Proof-of-stake is another consensus mechanism that is used to verify blockchain transactions. However,
it does so by using miners’ existing coins as a stake in the validation process, which demands less 
computers’ processing power.
ETHER PRICE AND DEVELOPMENT STAGES
For Professional clients only
WisdomTree.eu +44 (0) 207 448 4330
WisdomTree INTRODUCTION TO ETHEREUM 7
In summary, Bitcoin’s system is more defined and rigid because of its focus on the use case of cryptocurrency. 
Ethereum’s system is more flexible, accessible, and ever evolving, as its development relies heavily on 
participations to build an expansive network of applications. 
Conclusion 
A decentralized application platform – Ethereum might sound like an idea from science fiction. Yet it is already 
a blooming ecosystem. There are currently 148 million unique addresses receiving and sending transactions, 
6,867 computer nodes connecting to the Ethereum network, an average of 1.3 million transactions are executed 
per day, and more than 3,500 dApps are available6
. 
Ethereum offers an exciting opportunity to disrupt traditional industries by removing intermediaries and 
maximizing efficiency. Its innovation and execution bode a strong potential to make a huge impact in the real 
world. 
6 According to https://etherscan.io, www.ethernodes.org, https://www.stateofthedapps.com/rankings/
platform/ethereum, as of April 16th, 2021.
Bitcoin Ethereum
Live Inception January 2009 July 2015
Use Case Peer-to-peer electronic cash system,
focusing on the use of cryptocurrency 
Blockchain platform, focusing on building 
dApps
Functionalities Record keeping Record keeping + code execution
Coding Language Bitcoin Script is less coder-friendly, 
not Turing-complete
Solidity is the primary language. It is more 
coder-friendly and Turing-complete
Hashing Algorithm SHA-256 Ethash
Block Time 10 minutes 10-19 seconds 
Total Supply Cap 21 million No cap
For Professional clients only
WisdomTree.eu +44 (0) 207 448 4330
WisdomTree INTRODUCTION TO ETHEREUM 8
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
Communications issued in the European Economic Area (“EEA”): This document has been issued and 
approved by WisdomTree Ireland Limited, which is authorised and regulated by the Central Bank of Ireland.
Communications issued in jurisdictions outside of the EEA: This document has been issued and approved by 
WisdomTree UK Limited, which is authorised and regulated by the United Kingdom Financial Conduct Authority.
WisdomTree Ireland Limited and WisdomTree UK Limited are each referred to as “WisdomTree” (as applicable). 
Our Conflicts of Interest Policy and Inventory are available on request. 
For professional clients only. The information contained in this document is for your general information 
only and is neither an offer for sale nor a solicitation of an offer to buy securities or shares. This document 
should not be used as the basis for any investment decision. Investments may go up or down in value and 
you may lose some or all of the amount invested. Past performance is not necessarily a guide to future 
performance. Any decision to invest should be based on the information contained in the appropriate 
prospectus and after seeking independent investment, tax and legal advice. 
This document is not, and under no circumstances is to be construed as, an advertisement or any other step in 
furtherance of a public offering of shares or securities in the United States or any province or territory thereof. 
Neither this document nor any copy hereof should be taken, transmitted or distributed (directly or indirectly) 
into the United States. 
This document may contain independent market commentary prepared by WisdomTree based on publicly 
available information. Although WisdomTree endeavours to ensure the accuracy of the content in this document, 
WisdomTree does not warrant or guarantee its accuracy or correctness. Any third party data providers used to 
source the information in this document make no warranties or representation of any kind relating to such 
data. Where WisdomTree has expressed its own opinions related to product or market activity, these views 
may change. Neither WisdomTree, nor any affiliate, nor any of their respective officers, directors, partners, 
or employees accepts any liability whatsoever for any direct or consequential loss arising from any use of this 
document or its contents.
This document may contain forward looking statements including statements regarding current expectations 
or beliefs with regards to the performance of certain assets classes and/or sectors. Forward looking statements 
are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions. There can be no assurance that such statements will 
be accurate and actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in such statements. WisdomTree 
strongly recommends that you do not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.
Any historical performance included in this document may be based on back testing. Back testing is the process 
of evaluating an investment strategy by applying it to historical data to simulate what the performance of 
such strategy would have been. However, back tested performance is purely hypothetical and is provided in 
this document solely for informational purposes. Back tested data does not represent actual performance and 
should not be interpreted as an indication of actual or future performance. 
Cryptocurrencies are a high-risk investment and may not be suitable for all types of investor. Cryptocurrencies 
can demonstrate higher volatility than other asset classes.